You've most likely already seen the Fetch syntax around in the wild.
But now that we've gotten this far with
promises and the concepts of asynchronous programming,
let's take another look at how it works.
Fetch has become a popular option for making requests to external web resources.
Before Fetch, there were many iterations of syntax for making asynchronous HTTP calls.
So humor me a second as we take a brief historical look at the JavaScript Ajax request.
This is it, the original way in JavaScript
to make asynchronous requests to an external resource.
This was a big deal because without blocking the web page for the user,
JavaScript could live update the site with information from another server.
Don't worry, you're allowed to be intimidated by this syntax.
It was definitely intimidating to me.
You don't have to understand all of what it's doing.
Later, the incredibly popular library jQuery came out with a new syntax.
Here's an example of the jQuery Ajax request.
Maybe you can see why this Ajax request became the preferred way to make HTTP requests.
But when promises were added to JavaScript in ES6,
it allowed for a whole new way to handle asynchronous HTTP requests, the Fetch request.
Here's an example of a basic Fetch request.
Hopefully, bells are going off in your brain right now.
You've seen some of this before, and you're right.
Calling Fetch returns a promise,
a promise that we can build then and catch chain's off of.
This is a very simple Fetch request,
a GET type request.
You can see that all I need is the URL I want to get information from,
and Fetch assumes the rest.
But how does Fetch use promises?
Well, the Fetch function does a few things for us,
not only does it create a request to a resource,
but it does it inside of a new promise,
just like we used in the previous sections.
That means that we're back to the library analogy.
We ask for a piece of information that happens to live on another server.
While we are waiting for that server response to get back to us,
the promise created by Fetch is pending.
If the response comes back with an HTTP error code of four or 500 level,
it will trigger and cause the catch clause.
But anything two or 300 level,
will trigger the then clause.
This syntax can make handling HTTP requests so much easier.
Fetch was a truly exciting development in the JavaScript community.
The idea has spread into other libraries like Axios,
which is also a promise-based way to make HTTP requests,
but one that is designed specifically with the REST API in mind.
We will focus on Fetch in this course,
but once you learn it,
other libraries like Axios will be so similar,
you'll pick them up in no time.
Let's take a look at some Fetch requests in action.
I have set up a node express server of running on port 3,000 to make requests to.
Here is an example of a GET request with Fetch.
We don't have to specify the verb because Fetch uses GET by default.
When we run this,
you can see that I get a response from my makeshift API.
But if I make a request to an endpoint that doesn't exist,
then the server will return an error.
The error triggers the catch clause to run.
So here, I'm printing that error to the screen.
It's not very pretty,
but that's what a node error looks like in this case.
What if we want to make a request other than a GET type request?
Here's an example of a POST,
but the syntax is the same for all other verbs.
You can see that Fetch has an optional second argument
that allows us to pass in extra information about our request.
This object can include information like the method,
the mode, headers, and body.
We will not go into detail on all of these
because they're outside the scope of this lesson.
But we'll take a look at the method and body here.
Method is for the name of your HTTP verb
and body is for the information you want to send with the request.
If you are sending JSON,
then you need a header telling the API that you're sending JSON.
Typically, the body will need to be JSON formatted.
When I run this, I get a response saying that I
successfully made a POST request which matches the verb that I used,
and Norman, which was the name that I passed in the body.
Now, let's take a look at an example that proves
Fetch requests are asynchronous in nature.
On the API side,
I've added a timeout on this route that will
force it to wait for three seconds before responding.
I'm console logging something before and after the request.
This will give you a good example of how Fetch requests are asynchronous.
When I run the code,
you can see that first thing and second thing,
log immediately after each other.
Because this request, too long example,
has taken two seconds.
The message, this request took two seconds,
is my result from the API.
Hopefully, these examples have given you
a better picture of what it looks like to use Fetch,
and you'll get the chance to try it out on your own in the next set of challenges